This README.txt file was updated on 17 August 2023 by Zoey Neale

GENERAL INFORMATION

1. Paper information
Citation: Zoey Neale and Volker Rudolf. 2023. Temperature-dependent predator-prey dynamics: unveiling complexities across species and contexts in a warming world. In preparation

Abstract: Rising global temperatures have profound influences on natural ecosystems. Direct effects of environmental warming on individual metabolic rates scale up to influence every level of biological organization. Past studies examine direct effects of temperature on individual and population performances, but less attention has been paid to indirect effects on species interactions such as predation. In this thesis I investigate how predator thermal responses differ across species and contexts and the implications this can have on prey communities. In my first chapter, I experimentally tested and compared thermal responses of feeding rates of six predators collected from the same habitat to determine how species experiencing similar climatic conditions can vary in respond to temperature changes. I found large disparities in the thermal responses across species. Notably, the differences were large enough to shift the hierarchy of predators feeding on a shared prey along a temperature gradient. In my second chapter I examined whether local historic climate regimes influence thermal responses of species by experimentally comparing thermal responses of predators of the same species collected at different sites spanning a latitudinal gradient of 11°C. I found that thermal responses of populations can differ substantially across latitudes. Predators at higher latitudes demonstrated stronger sensitivities to temperature than predators collected from the lowest latitude. Moreover, differences in the shape of the response curves resulted in range-specific warming effects, with higher latitude predators increasing more than lower latitude predators along one portion of the gradient but decreasing more than lower latitudes along another portion. In my third chapter I explored how thermal responses of intraspecific demographic rates, predation, and interspecific competition among prey interact to influence population dynamics in a three-species food web. I found warming had opposing effects on prey population sizes independent of interspecific interactions, increasing population sizes at colder temperatures but suppressing them at warmer temperatures. Additionally, top-down control was dependent on temperature, with predators suppressing prey population sizes at intermediate-warm temperatures but not cold. Overall, these results highlight the context-dependence of predator-prey interactions to temperature and the need to consider these contexts when predicting and mitigating the effects of climate change.

2. Originators
Neale, Zoey, Rice University. zoey.neale@rice.edu
Rudolf, Volker, Rice University. vr2@rice.edu

3. Contact information
Zoey Neale
zneale@gmail.com

4. Date of data collection:
Summer 2022

5. Geographic location of data collection:
Pinckney, MI, Eureka, MO, and Kennard, TX

6. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:
NSF DEB-1655626

ACCESS INFORMATION

1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data: 
None

2. Data derived from other sources.
None

3. Recommended citation for this dataset: 
Zoey Neale and Volker Rudolf. 2023.  Temperature-dependent predator-prey dynamics: unveiling complexities across species and contexts in a warming world.

DATA AND CODE FILE OVERVIEW
This data repository contains 1 data files, 1 code script, and this README document, with the following data and code filenames and variables:

Data files and variables
1. lat-feed-data.csv contains the number of surviving prey at the end of each feeding trial.Variables: 
    site - the latitidunal site from which the predator was collected
    chamber - the numeric ID designating environmental chamber
    bath - the numeric ID designating water bath
    pond - the ID of the pond from which the predator was collected
    id - additional id assigned to some predators in cases where multiple predators from the same pond were              present in the water bath
    predmass - the dry mass of the predator
    temp - the temperature assigned for the feeding trial
    surv - the number of surviving prey at the end of the feeding trial
    dead - the number of dead prey at the end of the feeding trial
    
Code scripts and workflow:
  
  1. latitude_feedrates estimates predator feed rates and produces figures
 
  SOFTWARE VERSIONS:
  R 4.2.2
  
  REFERENCES
  None
  
